Received: (qmail 14057 invoked from network); 27 Apr 2004 19:31:46 -0000
Received: from iglu.org.il ([192.117.122.34])
          (envelope-sender <aettlinger@worldnet.att.net>)
          by smtp-1-4a.secureserver.net (qmail-ldap-1.03) with SMTP
          for <shlomif@episight.com>; 27 Apr 2004 19:31:46 -0000
Received: (qmail 5590 invoked by uid 200); 27 Apr 2004 19:29:29 -0000
Delivered-To: iglu.org.il-shlomif@iglu.org.il
Received: (qmail 5588 invoked from network); 27 Apr 2004 19:29:29 -0000
Received: from mtiwmhc11.worldnet.att.net (204.127.131.115)
  by iglu.org.il with SMTP; 27 Apr 2004 19:29:29 -0000
Received: from computername (213.new-york-18rh16rt-19rh15rt.ny.dial-access.att.net[12.75.154.213])
          by worldnet.att.net (mtiwmhc11) with SMTP
          id <2004042719310911100ie6gie>; Tue, 27 Apr 2004 19:31:09 +0000
Message-ID: <001701c42c8e$30ab5710$9865fea9@computername>
From: "Adrian Ettlinger" <aettlinger@worldnet.att.net>
To: "Shlomi Fish" <shlomif@iglu.org.il>
References: <200402141944.21597.shlomif@iglu.org.il> <200404122203.34610.shlomif@iglu.org.il> <000001c4224b$e1d08fd0$9865fea9@computername> <200405271248.50518.shlomif@iglu.org.il>
Subject: Re: Defining Freedom (religion department)
Date: Tue, 27 Apr 2004 15:31:01 -0400
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;
  charset="UTF-8"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Priority: 3
X-MSMail-Priority: Normal
X-Mailer: Microsoft Outlook Express 6.00.2800.1158
X-MimeOLE: Produced By Microsoft MimeOLE V6.00.2800.1165
X-Nonspam: None
X-Spam-Checker-Version: SpamAssassin 2.63 (2004-01-11) on 
	localhost.localdomain
X-Spam-Level: 
X-Spam-Status: No, hits=-4.9 required=5.0 tests=BAYES_00 autolearn=ham 
	version=2.63
X-UID: 
Status: RO
X-Status: R
X-KMail-EncryptionState: N
X-KMail-SignatureState: N
X-KMail-MDN-Sent: 

Hi Shlomi,

[Mormons] Are you sure it is because of their religion and not because of
other factors?
    The cause and effect, of course, can't really be proven either way.  The
founder of the colony in Salt Lake City, Brigham Young, was evidently a
remarkable man, very pragmatic in his outlook, and established the
foundation of what appears to be a very effective culture.

<<It is also possible that Mormons are harmed by religion in other ways.
Like unnecessary guilt, unhappiness, etc.>>
    Oh, the whole, I don't think one can say that, comparing their culture
to those dominated by other religions.  To be sure, they have a certain rate
of defections, but it is fairly low.  Reminds me of something else I asked
about.  In reading a little booklet they gave me, I learned something about
the structure, and there is a "priesthood" with an elaborate structure of
positions to which all male members of the church can aspire.  My niece's
husband is a "high priest", and I learned that her father (my now deceased
brother-in-law) was also one of those.  It sounds to me like almost any
self-respecting Mormon male becomes a high priest.  I asked a woman with
whom I've been acquainted whether there is ever any agitation by women to
have things changed so they can enter the priesthood.  She said only by
defectors from the church.  She said just about all the women take the
attitiude "The men have their role, and we have ours."  And it really seems
to operate that way, with every one contented.  It so happens I'm going to
be going to a convention in Utah in June, and I think I'll ask around among
the various local people I'll be meeting to get a better feel as to how
widespread is membership in the priesthood.

<<<<....sounding like visiting Mormon missionaries. >>
So how is the analogy with Mormon missionaries relevant here?>>
    :-)  That is something I guess you are spared in Israel.  The Mormons
send out many, many missionaries, so many that just about everyone in the US
has had one call at their door.  We used to, but I think after a few visits
they finally got wise that we are unconvertible.  It's a requirement to
belong to the priesthood that one go out "on mission" for a period of time
(maybe six months or a year).  Young women go also (I don't know what the
payoff is for them)  Usually a team of a young man and a young woman,
impeccably dressed (the man in a black suit with a tie), will appear at your
door, act extremely friendly and polite, and if you invite them in, will
give you all the fairy tales and fervently try to persuade you that you will
find a whole new life if you become a True Believer.  Some people try to
keep a lookout so as to not answer their doors when they see Mormon
missionaries approaching.

<<What's "stalart"? Did you mean "stalwart"?>>
    Correct.  A typo.

<<.....their rejection of the Harry Potter series was encouraging...... That
was a funny column.>>
    Good story.  Of course the difference is everyone knows Harry Potter is
intended as fantasty.  There's been an opposite reaction here.  Some
arch-Christian people have protested the Harry Potter thing as teaching kids
to believe in witchcraft.

<<Actually, Sunday in Christianity is not necessarily a Sabbath. A Sabbath
is a day in which no work is necessary to be conducted. Sunday for the
Christians
is a holy day, but for many times, they studied or even worked at it. >>
    Actually, for Christian here, it used to be more of a Sabbath than it is
now.  In studying railroad history, in the mid-to late 19th century, many
railroads would not run trains on Sunday, as a example.  It depended
somewhat on the president of the company, and how devout he was.  And what
are called "blue laws" have persisted, although gradually being attenuated,
until today.  New York State still has a law that alcoholic beverages cannot
be served in restaurants until noon on Sunday.  And liquor stores are not
allowed to be open on Sunday.  But Jews, especially orthodox, certainly do
observe their Sabbath much more consistently than do Christians.

[AE] So now I finally understand why the Jews stick to Saturday.
[SF] Jews don't stick to Saturday as an anti-thesis to Christianity.
Saturday has been the traditional Jewish Sabbath for generations
    I meant that at least partly tongue-in-cheek.  Let's just say that if
some Jews ever had any impulse to shift to Sunday just to conform, the
rationale given by the Christians for that day would be very likely to
dissuade therm.

<<Note that the length of the week was not consistent in the Ancient world.
In Rome, the week was Eight days long. (with a rest day at the end). Jews
 probably followed a different 7-days long week.>>
    I recently researched that.   The weekly cycle in primtive cultures,
evidently, was usually based on the spacing of market days.  In West Africa,
there was a four-day cycle.  In Egypt, ten days.  How the bible happened to
be written to accommodate seven days, it appears, derived from the fact that
ancient Babylonia used seven days.

<<What this book claims (and bases on a lot of evidence) is that until the
late second millenium B.C., men were completely unconscious and operated by
 hallucinating the voices of various gods in their heads and following them.
This is in fact the origin of the conscious religion, which is still present
today. Consciousness in fact nullifies the voices of Gods and enables a
person to control his own actions without external guidance.>>
    That sounds liek a strange fabrication to me.  What is meant by
"unconscious"?  It seems to me this ignores the fact that all animals use
their senses to react to events they observe, and that affect them.  We have
a new cat these days (we used to own several, and just recenly resumed being
pet owners).  As I watch him, I certainly wouldn't say he's "unconsciious".
Unless this is equating "consciousness" with "capable of rational thought".
I feel the origin of religion is very obvious.  As man evolved and acquire
more and more intelligence, he developed a curiosity, a desire to
understand.  The forces of nature were beyond his understanding, and he
explained them by inventing gods.

    One of the new books I've just acqured is entititled "God Against the
Gods", and is a history of the development of monotheism.  I don't know if
you'd agree that monotheism is at least an improvement on polytheism.  My
attention to this question comes from reading a book "Who Wrote the Bible",
an excellent analysis of how the Old Testament came about.  In reviewing the
way the Jews relationship to Yahweh is described in the earlier period, I
came to realize that the belief was not true monotheism.  The Jews worshiped
Yahweh as THEIR only god, but did not particularly claim that the gods
worshipped by other peoples did not exist.  (It was "Yahweh is our guy;
other people have their own".)  In later stages, there is only a hint of a
feeling that the Jewish God is a universal one, but it doens't seem the
authors of the Old Testament ever made a big deal about it.

    It's interesting to carry this to the present day, because Christianity
can be accused of not being strictly monothesitic, with their Holy Trinity.
In fact, in reading the history of Islam, one of Mohammed's main points was
to advocate a strict monotheism ("There is only one God, and he is Allah")
in contrast to the Christians.  Early Muslims had less to quarrel with
theologically with the Jews than they did with the Christians, although they
didn't really think the Jews were emphatic enough in their monotheism.

    Going to close this now and take a look at that website about the
"bicameral" book.

    OK, now that I've seen the Amazon site, it does sound intriguing.  I
didn't bother to pluck passages from the reviews I might quote, and maybe I
shouldn't be critical until I've read the book.  I just bought a batch of
books, so I won't be able to get to Jaynes for a while.  But one book I have
pending is by Matt Ridley "Nature Via Nurture" which deals partly with this
same theme.  I thought it interesting that, in sequence the Amazon showed
reviews in the sequence first a five star, then a three start, then a one
star (followed by a few five stars, to get you to buy the book..  I was most
sympathetic to the one star.  But the first one, the five star, made a point
much more fluently similar to what I'd been trying to say above.  The
distiinction between thought stimulated by sensory observations and thought
like the "sense of self".

Best regards, ------------------------Adrian


