Date: Sat, 19 Apr 2003 17:37:45 +0300 (IDT)
From: Shlomi Fish <shlomif@vipe.technion.ac.il>
To: Adrian Ettlinger <aettlinger@worldnet.att.net>
Subject: Re: More chit-chat
In-Reply-To: <001201c30665$cf3311c0$f753580c@computer>
Message-ID: <Pine.LNX.4.33L2.0304191526010.20939-100000@vipe.technion.ac.il>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN;
  charset=US-ASCII
Status: RO
X-Status: A
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 378
X-KMail-EncryptionState: 
X-KMail-SignatureState: 
X-KMail-MDN-Sent: 

On Sat, 19 Apr 2003, Adrian Ettlinger wrote:

> Hi Shlomi,
>
>     You might really be able to help me out technically.  I have a project
> where I might have to start learing Perl.  At the moment it's on a back
> burner, but I'll let you know if I pick it up, and might use some guidance
> from you.  Will be especially interested in advice for beginners.
>

I will be more than glad to help you. Note that I would recommend anyone
to learn Perl, because it's very useful in real life situation and gives
you many important insights about programming and computers in general.

You can find a good non-interactive help in mailing lists. Most local Perl
Mongers mailing lists will be happy to help beginners. I am a member of
the Israeli Perl Mongers mailing list and you are welcome to join there.
If you decide to join a different community, I'll join the mailing list as
well to help you.

There's an international Perl Beginners mailing list, but it's too
crowded (100+ messages a day). I formed my own at the site, which at the
moment has had little messages (or subscribers). But it was formed just a
few days ago, so I'm still happy.

As for starting to learn perl, there are a few good resources online. One
of them is Simon Cozens' book Beginning Perl:

http://learn.perl.org/library/beginning_perl/

Another is my own Perl for Perl Newbies series for the Haifa Linux Club:

http://vipe.technion.ac.il/~shlomif/lecture/Perl/Newbies/

My series assumes that you'll read the Perl internal docs later on, and is
just a stepping stone for reading them. Simon's book is more
comprehensive, but I did not have the time to read it.

I learned Perl from the man pages, but it was still relatively hard.
(that's part of the reason why I eventually wrote the Perl for Newbies
series.)

If you wish to read a paper book, there are also some good books which you
can order from Amazon. Just ask people before you buy because many books
have an awful reputation.

> <<That put aside, you haven't told me yet what your children and
> grand-children do. I'll be very interested to know that.>>
>     If you're really interested.  My daughter lives the closest.  She's an
> art teacher in elementary school, and she's married to a union carpenter.
> She really married "beneath her station" intellectually.

OK. Nice.

> My son-in-law may
> have a lot of native intelligence, but is extremely uneducated and not
> interested in learning anything outside of his narrow sphere of interests.

That's a shame. I'm trying to learn everything I can about computers and
many other areas. Eventually I forget many things, but I still remember a
lot. I remember a lot of useful things and some completely useless ones.
(like anecdotes from many movies).

I'm really glad I'm interested in Math/CS/EE, because it has a lot of
concepts and not really a lot that needs to be memorized. I did not like
history or literature much in high school because the material was not at
hand during the test, so people memorized everything. I tried to remember
the main concepts and the general wave, and wrote very laconic tests. As a
result, my grades were usually inferior to many other people in my class.
In EE, most of the tests are open material ones, but that's not the case
in the Math department. (sometimes they tell you to give an entire long
proof in a closed-material test)

If I had to study medicine or something similar, you can be sure I
wouldn't survive one semester.

> They have three kids, a boy 11, and girl 9 and another boy 5.  All their
> kids are very bright.  The 5-year old just had an IQ test and came out in
> the140's somewhere.  (That's "genius" level).
>

Very nice. Of course, I don't know what's my IQ is and I don't really
care. IQ rarely measures competency and there isn't a 1-to-1 correlation
between a person's IQ and his intellectual achievements. (despite popular
belief). I did get 766 on my S.A.T... and I did not take one of these
courses and only studied from a course book.

FYI, I heard of a study that says that gifted children (intelligence-wise)
who receive special education usually eventually don't achieve as much as
those who did not. Their main contribution is in inspiring, finding
or teaching other intelligent people. I can testify from experience that
this seems to be the case.


>      My son obtained an engineering degree and then told me he decided he
> wanted a law degree, so he has both.  But he hasn't followed a standard
> lucrative career as a lawyer.  He lives in the Washington area and works for
> a public interest organization.

You mean an NPO? What does this organization do? (just out of curiousity)

> I think you and he might have a lot in
> common.  He is more interested in being a useful citizen than he is in
> acquiring wealth.  Which I think might be a paraphrase of how you have
> described yourself as regards your interest in open-source software.

Note that I'm still interested in producing important tangible values.
But, like I said, I don't have anything against people who don't produce
as much, because there's nothing wrong in it. "First, do not harm".
Anything beyond that is optional.

Of course, many of the so-called "mystics" actively harm people without a
very good cause for harming them. Enacting destructive laws, etc. They do
it, because they brough themselves to such a state. Mysticism is an
addiction. Normal people who are free and idealistic will not voluntarily
harm anyone, and enjoy being good and productive. OTOH, mystics are
miserable, fearful people who find a temporary relief (and subsequent
worse feeling) in harming others. One can become a mystic out of being a
value-producer, and some mystics reverted back to becoming productive
again.

Some people think that the key to our civilization's flourishing is making
sure everybody is productive. That is not the issue. The key is making
sure no-one will harm anybody else.

> My
> daughter-in-law is a very interesting person.  She had worked, and still
> works occasionally, as a tour guide in Washington, and is very knowledgable
> on area and national history.  My son definitely did not marry "beneath his
> station" intellectually.  They're very compatible that way.

OK. Sounds nice. If I'm in the D.C. area (where I have a few relatives),
I might try to get in touch with her. (or vice versa) (or maybe you meant
Washington State, which isn't very likely)

> They have two
> kids, a boy 11 and girl 8.  They aren't as ostensively bright as my
> daughter's kids, but still decidedly above average, I'd say,  Their son, I
> think, has the makings of an engineer or scientist -- he's very imaginative.
>

Good, that's good.

>     Now that I've given some description of my family, I'm curious about
> yours.  What business is your father in?  Is the family very religious?

Here's a description of it:

My father is the son of two Easter European parents. My grandfather on his
side, escaped from the Nazis during WWII through half of Russia (he was
originally from Poland), and eventually came to Israel via Teheran. He
ended up working as a press worker in the publishing house of "Davar",
which is owned by the national Union of Labourers. (Histadroth Ha'ovdim).
Some of his family did survive, but we are unaware of the current
whereabouts of most of the others and they probably died.

My grandmother on my father's side's made Aliya to Israel along with most
of her family, before Israel was formed. Her father was an author who
wrote in Hebrew, and was quite idealistic. She met my grandfather, and
they fell in love and married. Her father died before my father, and my
father was named after him: Falk.[1] He was their only child.

My mother came with her entire family from Iraq in the early years when
the state of Israel was formed. She and all her siblings married
Ashkenazis, but we live in four different parts of Israel (one at a
Kibbutz near the Kinnereth, one at Tel Aviv, one at Holon (which is very
near to Tel-Aviv), and the other in Be'er-Sheva). At the moment, three of
my cousins are married, and others have a boyfriend or girlfriend. (not
including my sisters and I).

My family is very much secular. I am an atheist, and many of us are deists
or so.

My father has a Ph.D. in Immunology, and actually works in the
Bio-Technological industry. He co-founded a successful company, (but
constantly complains about the other workers), which was taken over by an
American company, which he has know been working for their other
subsdiaries. I find Bio-Technology to be interesting, but there are too
many materials, etc. that need to be remembered. So I constantly rely on
him for information.

My mother is a Teacher in elementary school (mainly math), and now also a
Teachers' guide, and the co-author of a successful math learning book. She
also has tall tales (and long phone talks with her co-workers) about abuse
from fellow workers and the current poor state of education in Israel.

I, like I said am an IT worker. I worked as a programmer, QA engineer,
etc. in several small firms before joining the Technion. (all of them
startups and all of them still alive and kicking, which is rare). I study
EE in the Technion, and hopefully will finish my degree soon. I'm really
looking forward for having a degree and no longer have to study.

While I studied in the Technion, I also experienced in open-source
software, and in helping myself and others get their Linux and Windows
jobs done. (either online or IRL). Strangely enough, I was one of the
smartest kids in my class, and in the Technion I also don't feel inferior
to anyone intellectually. (despite the fact that it chooses the best kids
from all over Israel). Some of them, I felt were more or less equal to me,
but I did not meant one which was superior.

A person I really look up to now (albeit not consider my superior) is Muli
Ben-Yehuda (http://www.mulix.org/). He is an expert hacker, knows English
well, is constantly learning new things, and is a great guy. What
distinguishes him from me is his wonderful person-to-person skills. He
gives very good lecture and everyone seems to like him. My relationship
with the fellow community is a bit edgy, because I sometimes do not phrase
myself well. I am a bit jealous of him, but naturally do my best to
improve my own person-to-person skills.

My middle sister studied in the same high school I did, served in the IDF
as an officer, and now studies Bio-Medical Eng. in Tel Aviv University.
She is quite intelligent, but does not have the mathematical sense that I
have, and so has to work quite hard, and constantly bugs me with
questions. She is very sociable, and has many friends and makes more very
easily.

My youngest sister studied in the same high school, and served in the Army
as an executive clerk in the Jehuda and Samaria. Back then, she knew the
entire geography of the occupied territories by heart. Now she spends her
time resting, doing very little activity, and hanging around the Lifehouse
online forum. ;-) She is about to start studying in the Technion next
year, in the CS faculty. I told her that it might be a good idea to study
EE or Computer Engineering (a joint CS/EE path), because I feel some
CS graduates have too much theory injected in them, and too little
practical knowledge and understanding of how a computer works. This, in
turn, can make them better programmers.

Many optimizations don't reduce the overall complexity of the program, but
still make programs much faster. Of course, I've seen many people in EE
who wrote very sloppy or unmodular code, but I know for certain this
problem is not limited to EE. It's a matter of attitude and curiosity
above all. Many people will become better programmers after one year, than
many after ten.

> I
> was going to comment about the one Seder I went to, that the family was a
> very observant orthodox one, and I recall the Seder as accompanied with a
> lot of what I was going to call "religious" "liturgy".  But thinking about
> it further, it might not be accurate to say it was "religious".  It was
> perhaps more in the nature of "historical remembrance" of the background of
> Jewish history.  So tell me, in your family Seders, do you follow any sort
> of prescribed pattern of ceremony, or is it just an informal family
> gathering?
>

We read the Hagada and everything, but skip a lot of parts because we want
to get to the food and to the mingling afterwards. Lately, Seders have
become shorter and shorter in the net time dedicated to reading them,
perhaps because more and more people attend them. But they are very fun.

Orthodox (=Haredi) Jews sometimes hold mass-Seders, in which the entire
community gathers around in one hall, and even outsiders are invited or
welcome. I think religious or secular Jews prefer more intimate family or
extended family gatherings. In Erev Pesach you can be sure the main roads
will be loaded, and there won't be any parking available anywhere.

Note that technically, I am an Orthodox Jew. And I dislike the easy route
to Judaism that the reformists have enacted. I have an essay in mind
titled "The Secular Judaism Manifesto", which I'd like to write based on a
previous section in an essay I wrote sometimes ago about my ideology.
(which I did not finish yet and would like to revamp). In it I claim that
Judaism is much more than a religion and that being Secular is not only a
good thing, but also a very desirable one. I intend to bring there some
modifications to mainstream Judaism including a secular conversion to
Judaism, which will be as hard as the Orthodox one only with meaningful
implications.

Regards,

	Shlomi Fish

> Best regards, ---------------Adrian
>
>

[1] - Falk is an unusual name, especially for a Jew and in Hebrew. It is
keep being misspelled in various occassions. "Fish Feller", "Fash Filk",
"Fish Felez", "Flak Fish" - you name it.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Shlomi Fish        shlomif@vipe.technion.ac.il
Home Page:         http://t2.technion.ac.il/~shlomif/

An apple a day will keep a doctor away. Two apples a day will keep two
doctors away.

	Falk Fish


