Return-Path: <aettlinger@worldnet.att.net>
Delivered-To: shlomif@vipe.technion.ac.il
Received: (qmail 9033 invoked from network); 31 May 2003 00:46:39 -0000
Received: from mtiwmhc12.worldnet.att.net (204.127.131.116)
  by vipe.technion.ac.il with SMTP; 31 May 2003 00:46:39 -0000
Received: from computername (234.st-louis-55-60rs.mo.dial-access.att.net[12.85.129.234])
          by mtiwmhc12.worldnet.att.net (mtiwmhc12) with SMTP
          id <2003053100463211200nveeue>; Sat, 31 May 2003 00:46:32 +0000
Message-ID: <000101c3270e$156594b0$9865fea9@computername>
From: "Adrian Ettlinger" <aettlinger@worldnet.att.net>
To: "Shlomi Fish" <shlomif@vipe.technion.ac.il>
References: <Pine.LNX.4.33L2.0305201652330.11768-100000@vipe.technion.ac.il>
Subject: Re: More chit-chat
Date: Fri, 30 May 2003 16:51:32 -0400
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;
  charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Priority: 3
X-MSMail-Priority: Normal
X-Mailer: Microsoft Outlook Express 6.00.2600.0000
X-MimeOLE: Produced By Microsoft MimeOLE V6.00.2600.0000
X-Spam-Status: No, hits=1.1 required=2.6
	tests=DATE_IN_PAST_03_06,HTML_00_10,HTML_MESSAGE,REFERENCES
	version=2.55
X-Spam-Level: *
X-Spam-Checker-Version: SpamAssassin 2.55 (1.174.2.19-2003-05-19-exp)
Status: RO
X-Status: A
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 382
X-KMail-EncryptionState: 
X-KMail-SignatureState: 
X-KMail-MDN-Sent: 

Hi Shomi,

    The time it's been taking for me to reply to you has not been because I
haven't been enjoying our interchanges.  I must say that when I write to
you, I like to pick a time when I feel relaxed and can take all the time I
might need to best express my thoughts.  And lately I've been involved in a
railroad history compilation project that has been occupying most of my
computer time.  But right now I'm away from home, and in an environment
where I have some relaxed time.

    I'll start by picking specific points in your last message where I feel
some expansion is called for.  I asked you to "explain Judaism as a religion
to me", or rather the "mystical" aspects of Judaism.  I might like some
expansion on some points, or on some I might like to "rebut".

<<1. A belief that Altruism is necessary....>>
    I'd question why you call that a "mystical" belief, and also whether
your mention of it means you are opposed to altruism.  I would call that
belief more in the nature of the "social engineering" of a religion, and
something that is pretty much in common, in one form or another, to all
religions.  I view that belief as a very common one that arises from the
biological imperative for the preservation of the human species.

<<.......and it is necessary to support the poor, the Priests, etc.>>
        Supporting the poor, as above, I view as really a social engineering
concept.  As far as the Priests are concerned, that's for the pragmatic
purpose of the preservation of the organizational structure, i. e., it's
simple pragmatism, for fund-raising purposes.  But I wouldn't call it
mystical.

<<2. The first commandment: "I am Jehuvah, your God". It practically makes
everything in the Bible derived from it, and thus can derive everything
irrational.>>        OK, but that supports my point that Judaism is much
more simplistic than Christianity in any of its forms.  You might say "makes
everything in the Bible derived from it", but an individual need not
necessarily interpret it that way.  A rationalist, I'd say, could become a
bible scholar and treat each section of the bible as both literature and an
"instruction book on how to live" in its own right, evaluating that section
for what it says, dismissing or ignoring whatever derivation someone else
mighr perceive as from the first commandment.

<< 3. Various arbitrary prohibitions (against eating Pork and Sea Food,
against eating Milk along with Meat, against eating unprepared meat, against
women wearing men's Clothes (including pants), etc.)>>
    Well, yes, but we have branches of the religion which ameliorate those
precepts, such as the reformed.  I'm not sure how definitive the reformed
ideas are.  My mother did not "keep kosher", but my parents would never eat
pork, although they would bacon and shellfish.  Again, however,. I'm not so
sure that fits the definition of what I'd call "mysticism".

<<4. A concept of a Jew being morally required to believe in God and not
hold other belief systems, and to practice the saying of religious Jews.>>
    Once again, that I'd call just pragmatic protectionism to hold the
community together.

<<All in all Orthodox Jews are having a very difficult life ........... It's
not a happy life.  Probably much worse than most theist Christians.>>
    There I could go along with you.  What you describe is interesting to
hear and something of a revelation for me.  I'd agree that "theistic
Christians", by and large, are not required to suffer for their beliefs.
Those that do are doing so voluntarily, such as members of the priesthood.
But not ordinary citizens.  It is ironic, in a sense, in that Jews in the
United States generally have the image of being economically very successful
as well as well-educated.  I. e. "a poor Jew is one who owns only one
Cadillac."  That, of course, is one thing that is behind much of the
anti-Semitism that remains here.  Which leads to a question.  Here in the
US, particularly in the midwest where I grew up, I'd say there are probably
more "reformed" Jews than there are Orthodox.  In between is a branch called
"Conservative".  In the east where I now live there is a larger
concentration of Orthodox.  But across all branches the general character of
the community is that it is well-educated and economically prosperous in
comparison with the general American population.  Is there in Israel a very
substantial presence of the reformed or conservative movements in religious
Judaism?  Is there much other variety, in additional branches of the faith?
I'm calling to mind now that we have a sect in the US, the Hasidic Jews, who
have a community in Brooklyn, and I believe they do not fit the standard
image of the affluent Jew.

    With regard to my friend who thinks (contrary to my opinion) that you
are just engaging in another form of religious activity in proselytizing for
atheism:
<<I think Atheists should try to convert other people to atheism as well,
because that way these people will be happier.>>
    When I think about the different attitudes of acquaintances who are
atheists, I've coined a new phrase.  I've long described myself as having an
interest in "comparative religion".  Now I'm developing a new interest:
"comparative atheism". The study of comparative atheism shows an interest in
what moves certain people in various cultures to proclaim themselves as
atheists.  That language might sound pejorative -- like I'm looking upon
atheism as a "cancer" but such is not the case.  Perhaps more preferable
would be by what process, and what exposures in life, do various people
becoming "enlightened to the truth of atheism".  Now to expound on this a
bit further:

    In religion-dominated societies (which includes virtually all
present-day human societies), children are usually brought up to believe in
a deity.  Some of these children, and I think it's fair to say the more
intelligent ones, reach a age of reckoning where they become enlightened and
reject the faith they were taught as children.  There are some people who
say this happens to them early in life -- as young as 3 to 5 years old.  But
I think in the US it's more common that this enlightenment occurs when a
person leaves home and goes to college.  I've met a few people who have told
me that.  The college experience very commonly becomes an eye-opener to the
variety of religious systems, and this exposes the hypocracies involved.

    Now then, we can ask what is being reacted to in various societies which
provokes the enlightenment?  As I've alluded before, in the US I believe the
most common single factor is revulsion against the fantasy tales that are
told to support the mysticism of Christianity.  From what you say about
Israel, it seems the motivation in your case is something entirely different
in nature -- the bonds of "intellectual slavery" in which the Orthodox
population of Israel is held.

    I think I've gone on long enough for now.  I hope this proves to be just
an introduction to a line of thought development that we can mutually carry
forward from this point.

Best regards, -------------------Adrian


